you hear a big once it picks up speed it
starts roaring like a freight train
traveling up to 80 miles per hour
enveloping any living thing in its path
you've only got about 10 or 15 minutes
to live under the snow before you die
from breathing your own carbon dioxide
are we uh Turley powerless against these
forces of nature well yes we can't
escape off the Avalanche
there's not much you can do but with the
help of science and Avalanche
specialists copy that Thanks we can put
up a pretty good fight all clear ready
to fire by detecting and preventing
these looming threats experts help keep
everyone from skiers to commuters out of
an avalanche is grasped my mother keeps
wondering when I'm gonna quit digging
holes in the snow for a living but
that's how we get our information
burrowing through the backcountry is
just part of a day's work for Bruce
Tremper director of forest service Utah
Avalanche Center one of the things that
makes avalanches hard to understand is
that the weak layers that cause most
Avalanche accidents don't fall from the
sky they're actually metamorphose in
place within the snowpack in this case
it's defined inner weakness that tremor
has to dig deep a lot of people don't
realize that snow is a very good
insulator so down underneath the snow on
the ground it's almost always near
freezing and then the snow surface is
actually quite cold and so you have this
big difference in temperature from the
snow surface down to the ground when you
have that steep temperature gradient you
also have a steeper vapor pressure
gradient water vapor is streaming up
through the snow very very rapidly and
forming a different kind of crystal
within the snow these large square
faceted crystals bond poorly to one
another and create a precarious
situation in the PAC's layer structure
too much stress or too much weight
collapses the weak layer and fractures
like this and propagates across the
entire slope and there's the slab that
slides downhill to determine degrees of
avalanche risk throughout Utah back
Tremper dig snow profiles and performs
compression tests almost daily nothing
there and ten times articulating from my
elbow oh and the whole thing fractured
on that layer of weak faceted snow at
the bottom you're using all your science
training and all your intuition that
you've gained through a lifetime of
doing this knowing which slopes are safe
which ones are dangerous and then
communicating that to the public being
an avalanche forecaster you're a natural
detective so you're going out there and
trying to figure it all out but educated
sleuthing isn't all it takes sometimes
averting disaster comes down to combat
Utah Department of Transportation
Avalanche forecasters Matt McKee and
Paul Garcia are breaking out the big
guns or one very big air gun meet the
Avalanche er it's a pneumatic gun a lot
like a high-powered BB gun can shoot an
explosive load about a mile through the
air and detonates on impact with the
snow this BB behemoth is powered by
nitrogen compressed up to 180 pounds per
square inch
firing it toward Avalanche prone zones
above the roads is a job perk with
purpose Barr observing whether this
ballistic stress triggers a slide helps
forecasters generate advisories for
Utah's drivers and snow enthusiasts the
avalanche danger is more extreme because
heavy snow is expected it's a good thing
these experts like to play in the snow
or a day on Utah slopes might be less
about fun and more about survival
you